## Fabula and Sjužet

<p class="lead">“Fabula” and “sjužet” are two words that have entered into narrative theory via
the Russian Formalists. Both “фабула” and “сюжет” can mean “plot,” but the
Russian Formalists narrowed down their definitions.</p>

Blah blah Russians blah.

Alex Woloch, in considering the role of minor characters in narratives, says
that their brief existences in narratives precisely help “establish the
relationship of ‘story’ and ‘discourse’—the events in the novel and the
rendition of these events in the narrative itself.” Woloch uses “histoire” and
“discours” to refer to these two terms (what I would call “fabula” and
“sjužet,”), while noting that 

>All these dichotomous terms refer, finally, to the essentially divided nature
>of the literary text, as it is torn between form and content; between the
>signified and the signifier; between the text’s linguistic world—words,
>sentences, chapters—and the imagined world that we grasp at through the text.
>Discourse points us to the narrative’s actual language and structure; story to
>the fictional events that we reconstruct through the narrative (Woloch 38).

The world generated by the novel has a spacetime that interacts with the
aesthetic means by which the world is uncovered in the plot. The elements of
the fabula are abstracted out and exist in a spatiotemporality we could call
“geohistory,” one where time moves only in one direction. Hence the fabula of
the Dublin created in “Wandering Rocks” could actually begin with the 8th Earl
of Kildare, whose late 15th century rule of Ireland comes up in conversation
between Lambert and O’Molloy, as those acts are a cause whose effect (the
conversation), bubbles up on Bloomsday. For the purposes of this visualization,
however, the timline of the fabula marches in its solitary direction from 14:55
to 15:58 on 16 June 1904.

The elements of the fabula, however, provide the foundation for the sjužet.
Here, the building blocks of the novel world’s geohistory are recombined with
aesthetics in mind. Within the sjužet, the fabula is reordered, and the
timeline is no longer a persistent march forward. 

Though _Ulysses_ moves linearly for the most part (save the clock’s resetting
at the beginning of the fourth episode), in “Wandering Rocks,” it’s clear how
different fabula and sjužet can be. Because of Joyce’s meticulous design for
the chapter, we can see it as a network of crisscrossing timelines. The first
moment in the episode is the same in both fabula and sjužet; Conmee checks his
watch. Similarly, the last is the same in both as well; Artifoni finally
catches a Dalkey tram just as the viceregal cavalcade passes him by. But these
events bookend something that jumps back and forth, underscoring the different
modes of spatiotemporality offered by fabula and sjužet.

Furthemore, “Wandering Rocks”’s focus on minor characters also highlights the
tension between the world of the novel (where the fabula is) and its art (where
the sjužet is). The episode takes the reader out of the frame of the Odyssey,
of the story of Stephen and Bloom. Instead, it showcases Dublin and its
inhabitants, a side story populated by masses of minor characters not typically
given the space to breathe in a novel. 

More Woloch blah.

Bal blah.
