## Spacetime, Nothing but Spacetime…

> Did it start with Bergson, or before? Space was treated as the dead, the
> fixed, the undialectical, the immobile. Time, on the contrary, was richness,
> fecundity, life, dialectic. (Foucault 70)

The relationship between space, spacetime, and the novel has been at the center
of my work for almost a decade now. And still I often start with this nearly
throwaway quote by Foucault from an interview that seems often cited instead
for its final kicker, “Geography must indeed necessarily lie at the heart of my
concerns” (77). But the solution to geography’s second-class status compared to
time isn’t solved by doubling down on geography, unless that is done just to
bring geography up to the same speed as time. 

In literary study, we have a nearly century-old model for thinking literature
spatiotemporally (as opposed to just temporally or, in a more postmodern,
Jamesonian vein, just spatially). Bakhtin defines the chronotope as that which
demonstrates the “intrinsic connectedness of temporal and spatial relationships
that are artistically expressed in literature.” Based on Einstein’s Theory of
Relativity, the chronotope “expresses the inseparability of space and time”
(84). Many critical geographers (Massey, Soja, Harvey) have insisted on
merging the two for decades now, but doing so continues to present challenges
to literary study, at least when thinking about the worlds a novel creates.

Authors of aesthetic texts have followed Aristotle’s command that a work have a
beginning, middle, and end for over two millennia. There is, then, an intrinsic
temporality provided merely by how we consume the text. Even edge cases like
Choose your Own Adventures or _Rayuela_ still provide a sort of linearity on
the fly. A sjužet remains; it’s just more reader-driven and divorced from the
increment variable we typically call “page number.” Barthes may write that “for
those of us who are trying to establish a plural… the reading must also be
plural, that is, without order of entrance,” but reaching his height of
plurality or writerliness is a summit that I’m still trying to work through
(and one more interconnected, as I believe its invocation here shows, with
spatiotemoprality than might be at first assumed). Barthes encourages us to
read “the text as if it had already been read,” which helps to manhandle and
interrupt the text (15).

Focussing on the competing, colliding, contradicting, and circumventing
spatiotemporalities in “Wandering Rocks” through this visualization actually
helps reach this goal of a shattered text, with what feels like literally
hundreds of obvious points of entry providing another rereading, another time
through, another production.

No matter what I’ve called spatiotemporalities in novels before (“sites,”
“разноречие” and “разномирность,” and so on), as I try to build out my idea of
“everyday criticism,” any kind of working over a text that allows these
variable points of entry and variable productions, these writings by readers,
must be useful towards that goal.
