## Wandering Rocks

<p class="lead">“Wandering Rocks” is the most obviously complexly, mechanically
intertwined episode in James Joyce’s 1992 novel <em>Ulysses</em>. It also stands
outside of the rest of the novel in its use of spatiotemporality, focus on
secondary characters, and lack of an analogue in <em>The Odyssey</em>.</p>

_Ulysses_, after all, has structural similarities to *The Odyssey*, but in the
latter, Odysseus is only told about the danger of sailing through the Wandering
Rocks. He takes his chances, instead, with Scylla and Charybdis. As a result,
the episode provides Joyce a bit of space in which to play outside the frame of
the rest of the novel, which is, of course, already a very forgiving frame.

Richard Ellmann notes that the episode brings “the city of Dublin even more
fully into the book by focusing upon it rather than upon Bloom or Stephen,” the
two main characters of the novel (452). In its difference from the rest of the
novel on these terms, it also reflects back on the rest of the novel. Stuart
Gilbert adds, “In its structure and its _technic_ (‘labyrinth’) this episode
may be regarded as a small-scale model of _Ulysses_ as a whole” (227).

As a novel-within-a-novel, then, the episode is broken up into 19 distinct
sections. Each centers around, more or less, a different character. Some move
around, with the greatest distance covered in the first and last sections. But
other characters remain in one place during the course of their section.
Furthermore, each section except the last features at least one “intrusion,”
which acts like a jump cut taking us to another location but at the same time.
Because the intrusions typically refer to characters who show up elsewhere in
the episode, it becomes possible to plot out a timeline of events, which is
what this visualization does.  We know person *x* was at place _n_ to meet
person *y*, but over at _m_ later to meet person *z*. But through the
intrusions, we also know where *y* and *z* were at the same time, though
separate from one another. These collisions are nowhere clearer than in the
final section, which features a viceregal cavalcade riding from Phoenix Park to
the Mirus Bazaar in Ballsbridge, thereby riding straight through downtown
Dublin, where nearly every character in the episode has an opportunity to
remark on the cavalcade as it rides past.

The text used in this visualization, with all the attendant caveats, is the
1986 edition edited by Hans Walter Gabler.

A brief description of each of the 19 episodes:

1. Father Conmee walks from his church to Artane, taking the tram for a part of his trip.

2. Corny Kelleher tends to a coffin and speaks to a constable.

3. A onelegged sailor walks to Eccles Street, where he is given money including a coin tossed by Molly Bloom from her window.

4. Katey and Boody Dedalus arrive home. Maggy offers them soup.

5. Blazes Boylan orders a package at Thornton’s to be sent to Molly and leers at the shopgirl.

6. Stephen Dedalus and Almidano Artifoni talk by Trinity College. Artifoni misses his tram.

7. Miss Dunne does some work and gets a phone call from Boylan.

8. Ned Lambert gives a tour of the council chamber of St. Mary’s Abbey to Hugh Love. J. J. O’Malloy accompanies.

9. Lenehan and M‘Coy walk from Crampton Court to Temple Bar to the Liffey. Lenehan tells a story about groping Molly.

10. Leopold Bloom decides which books to buy for Molly.

11. Dilly Dedalus runs into Simon Dedalus and asks him for money.

12. Tom Kernan walks from completing a business deal to the Liffey where he just misses the cavalcade.

13. Stephen looks over some books and runs into Dilly, who has bought a French primer.

14. Simon, Father Cowley, and Ben Dollard walk along the Liffey toward the Ormond Hotel.

15. Martin Cunningham, Jack Power, John Wyse Nolan, and Jimmy Henry walk from Dublin Castle to Kavanagh’s winerooms.

16. Buck Mulligan and Haines order mélanges at D. B. C. while John Howard Parnell plays chess.

17. Artifoni still chases his tram, while Cashel Boyle O’Connor Fitzmaurice Tisdall Farrell walks along Merrion Square.

18. Master Patrick Aloysius Dignam starts to bring porksteaks back home.

19. The viceregal cavalcade leaves Phoenix Park and drives through downtown Dublin on the way to the Mirus Bazaar.
